Add Tcloud SSO docs (#3827)
TobikoData/sqlmesh: docs/cloud/features/single_sign_on.md

# SSO (Single sign-on) 

## Overview

Tobiko Cloud supports single sign-on (SSO) through OpenID and SAML 2.0 providers. 

> This makes it easier to provision access to users and simplifies authentication. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes it easy to provision access to users and simplifies authentication. 
```

## Setup & Prerequsites 

You must have an active Tobiko Cloud instance with SSO enabled. Please contact your account team to ensure this is enabled. 

> If your Tobiko Cloud instance is setup to require SSO then you won't need to provide a token in your tcloud.yml configuration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Tobiko Cloud instance is setup to require SSO then you won't need to provide a token in your `tcloud.yml` configuration. 
```

> If your Tobiko Cloud instance is setup to require SSO then you won't need to provide a token in your tcloud.yml configuration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Tobiko Cloud instance is setup to require SSO, then you won't need to provide a token in your tcloud.yml configuration. 
```

> Below is an example of `tcloud.yml` configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an example of a `tcloud.yml` configuration:
```

```yaml
projects:
    <Project name>:
        url: <The project URL>
        token: <The access token>
        gateway: <The name of the SQLMesh gateway to use with this project>
        extras: <Optional - Any extras that should be installed with sqlmesh-enterprise>
        pip_executable: <Optional - The path to the pip executable to use. Ex: `uv pip` or `pip3`. Must install packages to the python environment running the tcloud command>
default_project: <The name of a project to use by default>
```

## Identity Providers

Tobiko Cloud currently supports OpenID and SAML 2.0. 

> This provider implements [OpenID Connect Core

Reviewer 2: In this section the term "This provider" is wrong since you're listing both. I think this paragraph needs to go below the OpenID header.

1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html) in order to allow us
to login with most OAuth 2 login providers.

### OpenID

There are two types of customers that might use OpenID Providers. The first is a
customer that would like to use a shared provider like Google, Github,
Microsoft, etc. 

If you use Okta and other custom OpenID/OAuth2 providers you need to add us
as an Application or Client (terms differ across providers).

You will need the following information to do this:

| Name         | Purpose                                                                                                                              | Value                                                  |
|--------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|

> | Redirect URI | Where the OAuth provider should redirect users to after a successfull login. Can also be called "Callback URL" or something simular. | `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/handler/<provider>` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Redirect URI | Where the OAuth provider should redirect users to after a successfull login. Can also be called "Callback URL" or something similar. | `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/handler/<provider>` |
```

If you are using a  SAML provider we need to receive three pieces of
information from you below:

| Name        | Purpose                                            | Example                                                                                                           |
|-------------|----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Entity ID   | This is the providers Entity ID                    | `https://saml.example.com/entityid`                                                                               |
| SSO URL     | This is the URL to use for SSO                     | `https://mocksaml.com/api/saml/sso`                                                                               |
| Certificate | The certificate of the SAML Provider in PEM format | [PEM Certificates](https://www.ssl.com/guide/pem-der-crt-and-cer-x-509-encodings-and-conversions/#ftoc-heading-1) |

We will provide a similar set of information below:

| Name        | Purpose                               | Example                                                      |

> |-------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|

Reviewer 2: We can add the metadata url here which will be `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/metadata/<name>`. This metadata technically has the SSO URL and Entity ID and Certificate in it. The Entity ID will change based on the provider but will be identical to the metadata URL.

| Entity ID   | This is our Entity ID                 | `https://cloud.tobikodata.com`                               |
| SSO URL     | This is our HTTP-Redirect Binding URL | `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/callback/<provider>` |
| Certificate | Our SAML Certificate                  | **TBD**                                                      |

The SSO URL will change per provider. For example if we had a provider named

> `acme`, our URL will be `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/callback/acme`.

Reviewer 2: As stated above, the Entity ID will as well: `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/metadata/<name>`

> # SSO (Single sign-on) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# SSO (Single Sign-On) 
```

## Overview

Tobiko Cloud supports single sign-on (SSO) through OpenID and SAML 2.0 providers. 

This makes it easy to provision access to users and simplifies authentication. 

## Setup & Prerequsites 

You must have an active Tobiko Cloud instance with SSO enabled. Please contact your account team to ensure this is enabled. 

If your Tobiko Cloud instance is setup to require SSO, then you won't need to provide a token in your `tcloud.yml` configuration. 

Below is an example of a `tcloud.yml` configuration:
```yaml
projects:
    <Project name>:
        url: <The project URL>

>         token: <The access token>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        token: <The access token> # you won't need this anymore
```

        gateway: <The name of the SQLMesh gateway to use with this project>
        extras: <Optional - Any extras that should be installed with sqlmesh-enterprise>
        pip_executable: <Optional - The path to the pip executable to use. Ex: `uv pip` or `pip3`. Must install packages to the python environment running the tcloud command>
default_project: <The name of a project to use by default>
```

## Identity Providers

Tobiko Cloud currently supports OpenID and SAML 2.0. 

### OpenID

This provider implements [OpenID Connect Core
1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html) in order to allow us
to login with most OAuth2 login providers.

> There are two types of customers that might use OpenID Providers. The first is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to use OpenID Providers. The first is a
```

> There are two types of customers that might use OpenID Providers. The first is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two types of customers that might use OpenID Providers. The first is
```

> customer that would like to use a shared provider like Google, Github,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if you use a shared provider like Google, Github,
```

Microsoft, etc. 

#### Google OAuth

> To enable Google OAuth, all we need is your domain. From here, we can switch SSO on with Google OAuth. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable Google OAuth, all we need is your domain (ex: `yourname@companyname.com`, `companyname.com` is the domain). From here, we can switch SSO on with Google OAuth. 
```

> The login flow will look like the following if you access cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/login directly from your browser. If authenticating through CLI see [here](https://sqlmesh.readthedocs.io/en/stable/cloud/features/single_sign_on/#status) for more details. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The login flow will look like the following if you access `cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/login` directly from your browser. If authenticating through CLI see [here](https://sqlmesh.readthedocs.io/en/stable/cloud/features/single_sign_on/#status) for more details. 
```

Reviewer: check if that hyperlink works

<video width="100%" height="100%" controls>

>   <source src="google_oauth.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer: Make this a loom video embedded. 1.1mb for a video each time someone clones this repo isn't worth the performance penalty.

| Name        | Purpose                               | Example                                                      |
|-------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| Metadata URL| TThis URL contains all of this information | `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/metadata/<provider>`                               |
| Entity ID   | This is our Entity ID                 | `https://cloud.tobikodata.com`                               |
| SSO URL     | This is our HTTP-Redirect Binding URL | `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/callback/<provider>` |
| Certificate | Our SAML Certificate                  | **TBD**                                                      |

All data except the certificate will change per provider. For example if we had
a provider named `acme`:

- **Metadata URL**: `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/metadata/acme`
- **Entity ID**: `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/metadata/acme`
- **SSO URL**: `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/callback/acme`

### Okta Integration

The following instructions will walk you through configuring Okta as your identity provider. 

> 1. Log into your Okta account. Navigate to Application and create a new app. You will want to select SAML 2.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Log into your Okta account. Navigate to Application and create a new app. You will want to select SAML 2.0
```

![okta_setup_1](./single_sign_on/okta_setup_1.png)

> 2. Next, name your app "Tobiko Cloud". You can add the app logo by downloading the image [here](https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/113925670?s=200&v=4). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, name your app "Tobiko Cloud". You can add the app logo by downloading the image [here](https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/113925670?s=200&v=4). 
```

![okta_setup_2](./single_sign_on/okta_setup_2.png)

#### SAML Configurations and Settings

1. We now need to fill in the SAML Settings. Please enter the following values: 

    - **Single sign-on URL**: `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/callback/acme`   
    - **Audience URI (SP Entity ID)**: `https://cloud.tobikodata.com/auth/saml/metadata/acme`

    ![okta_setup_3](./single_sign_on/okta_setup_3.png)

2. Fill in the Attribute Statements section with email, first_name, and last_name: These are required to properly map to your users. 

    ![okta_setup_4](./single_sign_on/okta_setup_4.png)

3. Click next and now you are on the last step. Check off the box `Contact app vendor` and hit `Finish`. Now you're all set! 

    ![okta_setup_5](./single_sign_on/okta_setup_5.png)

> Here is what you would see if you are accessing Tobiko Cloud via Okta. Click on the Tobiko Cloud icon to be redirected to the application. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is what you will see if you are accessing Tobiko Cloud via Okta. Click on the Tobiko Cloud icon to be redirected to the application. 
```
